OSDOCS-17170 zero-trust pre-migration work (#104736)
openshift/openshift-docs: modules/zero-trust-manager-ga-1-0-0-rns.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// * release_notes/ocp-4-20-release-notes.adoc

:_mod-docs-content-type: REFERENCE

> [id="zero-trust-manager-ga-1-0-0-rns{context}"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[id="zero-trust-manager-ga-1-0-0-rns_{context}"]
```
this one is a merge blocker unfortunately

Author: done

= {zero-trust-full} 1.0.0 (General Availability)

> [role="_abstract"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Done

Issued: 2025-12-17

> This release introduces capabilities for enterprise readiness, security, and operational flexibility. It includes SPIRE federation for cross-cluster identity, PostgreSQL support for production persistence, and enhanced security through stricter constraints and API validation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role="_abstract"]
This release introduces capabilities for enterprise readiness, security, and operational flexibility. It includes SPIRE federation for cross-cluster identity, PostgreSQL support for production persistence, and enhanced security through stricter constraints and API validation.
```
the latest from relnotes land

Author: Done

* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23438[RHBA-2025:23438]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23439[RHBA-2025:23439]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23440[RHBA-2025:23440]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23441[RHBA-2025:23441]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23442[RHBA-2025:23442]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23443[RHBA-2025:23443]
* https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHBA-2025:23446[RHBA-2025:23446]

{zero-trust-full} supports the following components and versions:git

[cols="1,1",options="header"]
|===
| Component
| Version

| SPIRE Server
| 1.13.3

| SPIRE Agent
| 1.13.3

| SPIRE Controller Manager
| 0.6.3

| SPIRE OIDC Discovery Provider
| 1.13.3

| SPIFFE CSI Driver
| 0.2.8
|===

[id="zero-trust-manager-1-0-0-features-enhancements_{context}"]
== New features and enhancements

SPIRE federation support::

The Operator now includes support for SPIRE federation, enabling workloads across distinct trust domains to securely communicate and authenticate with each other.

* Key capabilities:

** Configuration of bundle endpoints using `https_spiffe` (TLS) or `https_web` (Web PKI) profiles.

> ** Automatic certificate management via the ACME protocol (e.g., Let's Encrypt).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Automatic certificate management via the ACME protocol, such as Let's Encrypt.
```
no parens, IBM style

Author: Done

** Automatic {product-title} route creation for federation endpoints.
** Ability to configure relationships with multiple federated trust domains.

* Customer action required:

> ** Review the `federation` configuration within the `SpireServer` Custom Resource (CR).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Review the `federation` configuration within the `SpireServer` custom resource (CR).
```
only the acronym is capped

Author: Done

** Ensure proper DNS resolution and network connectivity to federated trust domains.

PostgreSQL database support::

> SPIRE Server now supports PostgreSQL as an external database backend, accommodating production deployments that necessitate enterprise-grade data persistence and high availability.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SPIRE Server now supports PostgreSQL as an external database backend, accommodating production deployments that necessitate enterprise-grade data persistence and high availability (HA) clusters.
```
users might scan for HA since they are used to seeing it; just a thought

Author: Done

* Supported Types: `sqlite3` (default), `postgres`, `mysql`.

* Customer action required:

** For production, evaluation of migration from SQLite to PostgreSQL is recommended.

> ** Creation and configuration of Kubernetes Secrets for database TLS certificates and credentials are required.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** Creation and configuration of Kubernetes secrets for database TLS certificates and credentials are required.
```
either l/c or Secret CRs (cap plus noun if you are talking about the object, lowercase if the general concept)

Author: Done

* The Operator and all operand containers are configured with the `ReadOnlyRootFilesystem` set to `true`.

Enhanced API validation::

Comprehensive Common Expression Language (CEL) validation has been integrated into all Custom Resource Definitions (CRDs) to prevent configuration errors during admission control.

* Key validations:

** All Operator CRDs are enforced as singletons (must be named `cluster`).
** Immutable Fields: Fields including `trustDomain`, `clusterName`, `bundleConfigMap`, `federation`, `bundleEndpoint` profile, and all `Persistence` settings (`size`, `accessMode`, and `storageClass`) are now immutable after initial creation.

* Customer action required:

** Review existing CR configurations to ensure compliance with the new validation rules.

Common configuration consolidation::

* Standard configuration options (`labels`, `resources`, `affinity`, `tolerations`, `nodeSelector`) are now standardized across all operand CRs via a shared `CommonConfig` structure.

Configuring log level and log format for the operands::

This release introduces flexible logging controls to improve observability and debugging across the platform:

> * SPIRE Components: Users can now configure the `logLevel` (debug, info, warn, error) and `logFormat` (text, JSON) independently for `SpireServer`, `SpireAgent`, and `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` directly within their CR specifications. The defaults are set to "info" for the `logLevel` and "text" for the `logFormat`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* SPIRE Components: Users can now configure the `logLevel`, for example, `debug`, `info`, `warn`, `error`, and the `logFormat`, such as `text`, `JSON`, independently for `SpireServer`, `SpireAgent`, and `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` directly within their CR specifications. The defaults are set to "info" for the `logLevel` and "text" for the `logFormat`.
```
corrected without parens; personally i would remove the log specifics:
Users can now configure the `logLevel` and `logFormat` parameters independently for `SpireServer`, `SpireAgent`, and `SpireOIDCDiscoveryProvider` directly within their respective CR specifications.

Author: Done

> * Operator: The operator’s log verbosity is now configurable via the `OPERATOR_LOG_LEVEL` environment variable using klog’s `textlogger`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Operator: The Operator log verbosity is now configurable via the `OPERATOR_LOG_LEVEL` environment variable using klog’s `textlogger`.
```
no possessives (and Operator is always capped in core OCP)

Author: Done

Refactor for create-only mode::

By setting the `CREATE_ONLY_MODE` environment variable, users can prevent the operator from reconciling updates. This allows for manual resource modification without interference. If this mode is disabled, the Operator resumes enforcing the state and overwrites any manual changes.

> == Status and observability improvements

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[id="status-obs-improvements_{context}"]
== Status and observability improvements
```
missing ID (merge blocker)

Author: Done

Enhanced status reporting::

* The main CR now aggregates status information from all operand CRs.

* New status conditions include Upgradeable (indicating a safe upgrade path) and Progressing (detailing deployment progress).

Operator metrics::

* Operator metrics are now exposed and secured with appropriate RBAC configuration.

* Integration is supported with the OpenShift monitoring stack.

[id="zero-trust-manager-1-0-0-bug-fixes_{context}"]
== Fixed issues

Enhanced Security Context Constraints for SPIRE Agent::
+

> Before this update, the SPIRE Agent and SPIFFE CSI Driver containers were running as root user, leading to potential security violations. With this release, Security Context Constraints (SCC) have been configured to ensure these components no longer run as root. While privileged container mode is still required for necessary capabilities, this change reduces potential security risks for the end user.

Reviewer: ayup, gotta fix this one

> Before this update, the SPIRE Agent and SPIFFE CSI Driver containers were running as root user, leading to potential security violations. With this release, Security Context Constraints (SCC) have been configured to ensure these components no longer run as root. While privileged container mode is still required for necessary capabilities, this change reduces potential security risks for the end user.

Author: Done

+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-60[SPIRE-60])

> SpireServer updates now propagate without operator restart::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SpireServer updates now propagate without Operator restart::
```

Author: Done

+

> * Before this update, the operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the operand CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to SpireServer CR resources were not propagated to the StatefulSet, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler's cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, day2 patch operations on SpireServer CRs will reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet without manual operator restart.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before this update, the Operator failed to trigger reconciliation after updating the `Operand` CR spec. As a consequence, user updates to `SpireServer` CR resources were not propagated to the StatefulSet, causing reconciliation to fail and changes to be ignored, leading to inconsistent resource allocation. With this release, the race condition between the manager and reconciler cache to trigger reconciliation after CR updates has been fixed. As a result, `day2 patch` operations on `SpireServer `CRs will reliably trigger reconciliation, ensuring updated values are applied to the StatefulSet pods without manual Operator restart.
```
hm is day2 patch something in the config? or is there just a missing space/hypen= day-2 patch
and i think the StatefulSet is a group of pods? anywho, needs a noun

Author: StatefulSet is a group of pods. I reworded the text

+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-68[SPIRE-68])

Removed unnecessary security context constraint for OpenID Connect discovery provider::
+
* Before this update, the system unnecessarily created a custom security context constraint (SCC) for the OpenID Connect (OIDC) discovery provider, which increased the security footprint and configuration complexity even though the deployment did not require it. With this release, the custom SCC creation logic has been removed, resulting in a configuration where the OIDC discovery provider operates successfully without the extra security constraints.
+
(link:https://issues.redhat.com/browse/SPIRE-190[SPIRE-190])

Fixed ConfigMap Reconciliation for SPIRE Controller Manager::
+

> Before this update, Spire-controller manager ConfigMap reconciliation failed due to an unhandled edge case in the previous implementation. As a consequence, users experienced configuration inconsistencies. With this release, the Spire-controller manager ConfigMap reconciliation issue has been resolved. As a result, end users now experience seamless Spire-controller manager configuration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Before this update, Spire-controller manager ConfigMap reconciliation failed due to an unhandled edge case in the previous implementation. As a consequence, users experienced configuration inconsistencies. With this release, the Spire-controller manager ConfigMap reconciliation issue has been resolved. As a result, users now experience seamless Spire-controller manager configuration.
```

Author: Done
